Overview

Dr. Barefield’s Lab (Barefield Lab) is interested in the heterogeneity of cells within the CCS. The Cardiac Conduction System (CCS) is a group of specialized muscle cells found in the heart’s walls. These muscle cells send signals to the rest of the heart muscle, which causes a contraction. Their distinct components include the sinoatrial node (SAN), the atrioventricular node/His bundle(AVN/His), and Purkinje fiber (PF) regions. The cells within these components were typically thought to be “homogeneous”. But each component of the CCS consists of unique cardiac cell types with their own physiological properties. Therefore, these components have significant cellular heterogeneity. The analysis of individual single cells within the CCS is important to discover the mechanisms of the heart not seen by studying a bulk population of cardiac cells.

Presently, there are a limited number of distinct molecular markers for the different CCS cell types. Knowing this creates challenges for additional investigation into their speciation, patterning, and function. Prior studies have assessed gene expression with individual components of the CCS, but they are unable to discern cell-type heterogeneity due to bulk tissue analysis. Single-cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq) can discern cell-type heterogeneity because it allows for global gene expression analysis at single-cell resolution. This type of sequencing identifies expression differences between individual cells in tissues previously thought to be homogenous in the CCS. The scRNA-Seq-Variation-Pipeline built here will re-map, cluster, and quantify scRNA-seq data from Goodyer et al. This paper discusses the transcriptomic profiling of the developing CCS at single-cell resolution in wild-type mouse hearts. Creating this pipeline using bioinformatics analysis will identify genes in the CCS with high expression variance within clusters.

Although there are hurdles in understanding the intricate cellular and molecular landscape of the CCS, the combination of microdissection, single-cell isolation, and RNA sequencing can be used to overcome these hurdles. The pipeline built will help provide a foundation for a molecular blueprint of the CCS. This project represents a comprehensive assessment of gene expression profiling and provides bioinformatics tools to facilitate future efforts in CCS cell identification and characterization.

Context

As aforementioned the CCS plays an essential role in heart development and function. Currently we know that there is  significant “intracomponent cell-type heterogeneity“ within each CCS component itself. 

An example of cell type heterogeneity in the CCS are transitional cells. Transitional cells are found in each CCS component. It has been hypothesized that transitional cells are responsible for amplifying current before passing it on to the surrounding myocardium which is crucial for the rhythmic beating of the heart. There are many cardiac disorders linked to disturbances in transitional cells including sinus node dysfunction, heart block and ventricular fibrillation. 

